#HDL or Hardware Description Languages enables us to **formalise verbal specifications** of a circuits.
- *Formal* means complete, precise and without ambiguities.
- Formal models are manipulated using computers $=>$ automation

#HDL allows **automated synthesis** of logic circuits (using Software).
- **Synthesis** - Transform higher-level/*behavioral* models into logic gates & descriptions for physical implementation.
- Formally described logic circuits at **higher abstraction levels** is translated into description using logic gates (lower abstraction level).
- Could be seen as schematic but in reality it is a data-base called **gate-level netlist**
## HDLs and Simulations
#HDL enables **automated simulation** to *verify functional properties* of the design before physical implementation; some manual preparation of the simulation environment is always necessary (scripting), but simulation process itself is fully automated.

More generally we speak about **model verification** at various stages of the flow.

HDLs can be used to automatically **generate physical design description** for a given target technology: FPGA or ASIC of a given CMOS technology node.

HDLs have great capacity for structuring, i.e. they allow description of very complex systems through hierarchical modeling top-down or bottom-up.

For complex systems, all the above can be done for circuits with millions of logic  gates and flip-flop fast enough (hours, days).
## Abstraction levels
#HDL can describe logic circuits at **various abstraction levels**.

For example we can describe an Arithmetical Logic Unit #ALU that will perform addition without necessarily describing how this operation will be done. Then, ALU can be described and *simulated* using a normal computer.
## HDL language classes
### Simulation
- Used to make more precise function specification, validate some system micro-architecture assumptions through simulation.
- NOT intended for physical implementation because models don’t have necessary levels of detail.
- Simulation is in general fast even for complex systems.
### Implementation
- Target physical implementation of circuits . Models describe functionality in detail to allow physical implementation (full custom CMOS IC, ASIC or FPGA).
- Very precise description of the system; it can be simulated too.
- Simulations are in general slow, especially for lower abstraction levels (one of the reasons that motivated simulation languages).

In reality most **HDLs can do both**! But we say that only a subset of what can be described using HDLs can be effectively synthesized.
### Practical HDL languages
**SystemC** - extension to C language to enable simulation of HW systems. Used to model complex HW systems and decide on some architectural choices before doing actual system design. #SystemC

**VHDL, Verilog** - mainly used for physical circuit simulation and implementation.
- Be careful because part of VHDL is not synthesisable because some constructs are used for simulation only.
- Also some synthesis tools do not allow certain constructs.
#VHDL #Verilog
## VHDL origins and usage
Acronym of an acronym:
- #VHDL = VHSIC Hardware Description Language 
- #VHSIC = Very High Speed Integrated Circuits 

Developed by Department of Defense of USA in early ’80.

Objective: **enable automated modeling, synthesis and implementation of complex** digital circuits to minimize development time, cost and errors through: 
- Formal specification of digital systems and **verification environment**
	- Verification – definition of input stimuli through test-benches, that will be applied to the system to gather outputs through simulation 
- Automated syntax and semantic consistency, circuit synthesis and physical implementation .
- The above is done using **Electronic Design Automation** (EDA), software tools that despite their super efficient algorithms need human intervention !!!

The above is true for Verilog too.